Thank you for coming for this final talk of our dev room and let's hope we even maybe
get the demo working, whatever that means.
So this talk is about how to get POSIX identities out of the OAuth identity providers.
Literally not about how to get them out today, but how we want to change the existing operating
system layers, which SSSD and Samba both are providing, to make it actually working and
maybe gain something interesting in the process of it. So who we are. This talk kind of packages
together a work we do at Red Hat on VAP, on Samba and SSSD and it's from me, Alexander
Bokavoy, then Andreas Schneider and Sumit Bosa who is one of the core developers of SSSD and
actually one of those three S in the name is Sumit. So is it. Yeah. And this talk is about a bunch of
different projects and different protocols and we will try to really just reflect on what is there
and maybe see some of the future that is there. The thing is that the POSIX identities is not
really what people typically think about them and it's something that is driven by the requirements
of a kernel or any unique separating system. And typically for the kernel the most important part
is that when a process is started it needs to run on the certain identity and when this process
needs to access a data stored somewhere that identity needs to be checked against identity
associated with this data. And the way how it's done varies widely across multiple operating systems
but on the POSIX side, so UNIX-like or POSIX-like operating systems which Linux tries to
implement and outperform in this implementation what could be there, the certain things are kind
of required. So UID and GID here you know it's user identity and group identity groups have
association with when process start there is a primary group of that user that is associated
with the process and that's how user get access to files not owned directly by the user but there
are more elements in it and basically the work we do in the login process is effectively enable
all the knowledge about these identities to the processes that will be started after the login.
And we focus on the enterprise environment but sometimes now enterprise is really
a small company that outsourced their authentication to a cloud provider and how
cloud provider handles their authentication is not their own business that their own business is what
they are doing but still the machines are here the workstations and they have this data that
needs to be stored somewhere right and associated with different stuff. And if we look at the
OAuth IDPS in this particular case I'm looking at the OIDC connect default claims
that you request when you use OIDC client then it's literally like two claims that can be reused
none of them is really useful for the actual operating system the description in both cases so
the Geekos field on the POSIX user side and the description of a group that's literally all you
can derive from the standard claims because if you get the name of the user from the OIDC claim
that's not literally the name you want to use as a POSIX username or POSIX group name you may but
here be dragons it might include the stuff like SQL sequences SQL things like drop tables
and so on in those names and you don't want really to get them in so you want to have certain
control over it and you don't get home directory you don't get shell that's what the login
process needs to know to launch the initial process of the login you don't get UID GIDs and so on
and more to that the access is authenticated so you cannot just come to this IDP ask over OIDC
endpoint and give me user token or whatever is there you have to prove that you are who you are
and you are who I DC client effectively so the fact is on a linux system SSH server has to know
that this user exists in the system before it authenticates you and there's no way to get
this authentication before the authentication of the user so it's kind of a cycle that we have to
break somehow then yeah on the other side you have effectively to enroll this machine this client
that will be talking to IDP and that means you have to store credentials somewhere the it is not
the user credentials at the sort of machine credentials so we come back to the enrollment
process similar to enterprise systems and there are requirements that it should be stored securely
so we we got back to what hardware dependencies TPM for measuring that what we store there is there
and so on so it's it's a lot of non-trivial stuff you start with simple things and you get
to the point that yeah you want to have this all secure right and if we look at the host enrollment
okay some IDPs allow you to dynamically create clients and sure you you can do that users who
can do that they there is a process that you can follow so properly if you have user credentials
then you can enroll create these clients store credentials for the client somewhere and ensure
that they secure encrypted and what not available only to the processes that get there so again
bind to TPM nice nice stuff that been talked especially at the virtualization framework
dev room yesterday about the confidential VMs and so on so there's infrastructure brewing
in the cloud not on the machines but luckily all these machines that have
certification for windows right they have hardware TPM and all this so theoretical it
should be there and actually it is used in a while because Microsoft Azure AD enrollment for the
machine actually uses this it requires TPM and in the hardware it requires to during enrollment
process to obtain certain tokens and get all of this stuff and store it and exchange cryptographically
sign it data with it all the interesting part of it is that we yeah we figured out parts of it and
force it Microsoft to document some of it we got help from them not for everything but there is a
process and there is even progress a bit in in proof of concept implementation of the enrollment for
Azure ID from David Mulder from somebody in and Susie and actually a few other people work together
with him but if you're enrolled you really have to protect these credentials you have to do something
to get them seriously not leaking anywhere and also you need to have some information on the IDP side
to retrieve it and and that's the bigger question there's no information like I said we we need to
define so what this work is about really is to define bits and pieces that we want to store for
post-ex identities in in the cloud and the most important part like it was already asked in the
previous talks it's all online only so Azure AD authorization authentication and authorization
is also online only Microsoft doesn't support offline work with that well they do support some
local accounts but then you don't get access to the cloud basis replicated data because it's
well not authorized then and finally we can do this on Linux of course because we have Pumstack we
can have local passwords and so on and this so but really if we don't have this information and for
many public IDPs like Google, GitLab, GitHub and so on we wouldn't have this extension or something
there we will only have whatever is there we'll have to generate this information so what we came
in is the experience that we had already with Samba and SSSD that we generate these IDs based on
certain properties it's hashing of certain values and placing the results of executing some
transformations into the ranges that we call ID ranges it's an algorithmic approach yeah
algorithmic approach and there are plenty of them so Sumit came with a few approaches nice one is for
example this fully qualified one where you basically use the fact that you can use name with
email like style or Kerberos like style with IDP domain being the suffix and then you split it so
the suffix is used to map to the ID range the specific range for that one and then the first part
is used to identify user within that range the downside is alias it would not be possible to
support with this because algorithmic mapping basically gives you one-to-one mapping otherwise
you have other problems and but it gets you stable mapping across multiple machines so then you can
log in with the same user on multiple machines and get access to the same files so this is kind
of an interesting story we will still continue working on it and if you have actually post-ex
information then maybe you just expose it so effectively make an a separate app that you can
query and retrieve the ID ranges retrieve the description of the algorithmic mapping and
certain things and maybe even attributes for the users like like Andrei was saying for the
AX where is where I can get my 50 additional user attributes that AX loves to have here you get them
right you can get this kind of extension and the nice part here is that maybe if we make this
app and interfaces kind of common enough then it could be reused between first multiple implementations
but second between multiple domains and maybe then we can at least start thinking how we can build
up trust and filter in and filter out this information somewhere but of course you can
store locally but the problem with the local one local information is that you not always also
trust it but maybe you trust the federation federated part because if the IDPs trust each other for
federation like you have your own key local key clock and then you have registered
ODP client against Google or GitHub or GitLab or whatever that is the federation right the
GitHub now knows you and allows you to query data about the user from which is registered at
GitHub or GitLab and if it provides you post-ex attributes would you trust them is this trust
actually going forward that far maybe it is between the organizations that have much more
control like research institutions and universities which have their own network of collaborators and
they can guarantee certain properties but not in general I guess so we probably should do there
and by the way they recognize in the OALF framework well they recognize the same problem so there is
a work ongoing on defining a spec for this identity chainings which is essentially
akin to Kerberos S4U protocol extensions and ability to track down who did what and against
whom so finally all of this brings us certain identity we need to log in in and IDP authentication
that Icar was showing before was really or Thomas was showing with Ansible free ABA is really what
it is about and but the most important part is okay it's annoying to perform this online
authentication every single time right it's annoying when you have to do SU or sudo and go
reach for for that GitHub link and perform it every single time it would be good to have it once
well to have it once we use Kerberos we cache the fact that we were authenticated initially
and that cache and all the metadata about this fact can be in a Kerberos ticket so this is
typical Kerberos flow in a normal environment and it assumes that you have this Kerberos KDC
the K distribution center somewhere in data center or somewhere and what if we put this locally
what I'm just sorry so one of the idea is when you are logged in you want to access
certain services they do not have support for an IDP but they have support already for Kerberos
so why not use Kerberos and use that already yep and we already do this so we basically have a lot
all this in the environments like Samba, AD or free IPA they both provide KDCs and they both
allow to get tickets with various properties check them and and so on we have actually authentication
against the external IDP the OAuth 2 device authorization flow that IPA supports it's done
through the Kerberos it's actually done behind the Kerberos KDC so when you run K-init to obtain
the ticket or SSSD authenticates you it runs K-init against the server and KDC spawns a process behind
it and runs the authentication against GitHub, GitLab and the others and all your key clock
that's already worse but it requires free IPA deployment okay if we run KDC locally we can
reuse more much of this code we only need to get this metadata securely but we'll
ready store OIDC client credentials right somewhere so maybe it's the question of getting this
information to that small part of the thing running on the local and surprisingly
if you want to run this it's not that much is needed of course some changes are needed
but we can reuse existing code we can do the work that was already heavily lifted and here's a
demo a small demo so I have here a machine which is actually let's hope I I can show something
this is just a podman ryanon container just fedora 39 custom because I did some
customization of the config in it this is a normal system so I can show you
that here's ryanon SSSD inside this system and it takes like 40 Mac memory whatever
system system did treats it this way this is KDC running on the same system
it only takes 1.6 megabyte if you trust what system did says here at least but yeah it's
it's not the question of memory use right it's more a question of do we want to expose this for
more than needed but maybe we can run this over a local host L.O. interface maybe we can put this
into namespace isolate and give only access to certain things there it's still still not possible
to do that fully bridge in the local host things with the namespace where there be 5 KDC run so in
this experiment it's running on the host unrestricted so it's like listening on all interfaces
but what I get is this so I'm logging in specifically as
normal user well this is admin user but it's a normal user right we have
password and I get the ticket as a part of that login so now I have configured actually this system to
I think it's this way to use SSSD with jssapi that means that if there is a Kerberos ticket and
you're allowed to use certain palm services with Kerberos ticket you will be allowed to use it
we can check that
I am able to just reach that
sudo without entering password the fact that I need to press enter is a bug in communication
between sudo and SSSD in this but specific setup it it doesn't require to do that in IPA setup for
example but the fact is I got the ticket and I used this ticket to actually obtain another ticket
the ticket to the host service on this machine that's the name of the machine that's
that's the name of the machine it's nothing special just the example thing yeah so
that is already possible I did small setup with SSSD for this but I can do this with other
SSSD just handles Kerberos better than this but what we get as a part of it is that we actually
solve in another problem because just when it was in November last year Microsoft announced
that they finally found their way to kill NTLM and you know how they did this by introducing local
KDC on Windows 11 machines just normal workstations so they are doing exactly the same they're
introducing a local active directory stripped down to not be an active directory adjust the KDC
effectively doing this stuff on the machine using an extension that was developed and sort of
abandoned more than 10 years ago for Kerberos this IO kerb and reviving it we have almost support for
in the MIT Kerberos so we can try and use this to to get it all working and then we get to the
point how we control all of it through the identity provider and now I am circling back to the first
talk of today of SpiceDB and Zanzibar maybe that's one of Answers how we can standardize
some sort of like that and import or export access to that through the IDPs and of course this is a
lot of changes and yeah I think we have basically no time to get through it but we will be talking
about this in detail at Samba XP in April conference which will be online by the way so accessible to
everyone so I encourage you to continue and follow up and if you're interested please ask questions
on maybe mail in this or just shut the mail in yep thank you very much
you